With the 2019 national elections months away, the gloves are off in Makana’s Council Chamber. Pressure to deliver on services, the ever-present threat of administration, divisions in Makana’s ANC caucus, the fact that some of Makana has lost direct control of some of its biggest annual grant funding, along with alleged political interference are some of the reasons for open conflict during recent Council meetings, say insiders. An expert says the results are destructive, with one casualty being the support all parties pledged for acting municipal manager Ted Pillay when he was appointed earlier this year to turn around the embattled local administration. As Makana plunged toward complete financial and administrative collapse at the end of 2017, Cogta MEC Fikile Xasa sent formal notice of his intention to put Makana under administration under Section 139(1)a. Xasa cited Makana’s failure to appoint a municipal manager (Systems Act 54A(1)) and its failure to manage its debt (“Non compliance with Section 65(2)e of the Municipal Finance Management Act in relation to expenditure management”). According to Council documents, on 22 November Makana owed just under R68 million, with the biggest amounts owed to Eskom, Amatola Water, the Department of Water and Sanitation and the Auditor General.
In a surprise move in the last Council meeting of the year, Chief Whip Mabhuti Matyumza called for the Sarah Baartman District Municipality to deploy their Municipal Manager Ted Pillay to Makana for three months in an acting MM role. With a reputation for efficiency and action, there was support across party divides for his appointment. He hit the ground running when he arrived on 1 February, engaging immediately with businesspeople, activists and politicians to establish priorities and act on the concerns of a disillusioned community. Pillay is the Municipal Manager of Sarah Baartman District Municipality (SBDM) and for this reason he’s been able to expidite a number of essential, but quick-win projects. However, reports on certain projects that he tabled in last week’s Special Council Meeting to table the final draft Budget and IDP were met with sharp criticism from ANC councillors, with Chief Whip Mabhuti Matyumza in particular calling for his decisions to be investigated. These included the news that Makana had lost R4.5 million of its Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) because of non-spending. The tender for the Alicedale Roads and Stormwater Project awarded at the end of the 2016/17 financial year was put on hold because of concerns about possible irregularities in the supply chain management processes. Pillay’s report said the non-spending had resulted in R4.5m being deducted from the March 2018 Equitable Share allocation to SBDM. “This money has to be recovered by SBDM from the MIG funds currently held by them on behalf of Makana Municipality,” Pillay wrote. This drew outrage from Mayor Nomhle Gaga in particular, who said, “If I was given the opportunity to represent the muni this money would not have been taken. The District disserviced us. They didn’t represent us as Makana.” A road-repair project that Pillay moved on to be completed in time for the National Arts Festival, with a dedicated R10 million grant from Cogta, was also questioned by councillors. It also drew the fury of Speaker Yandiswa Vara, who said, “The support we are getting as Makana is based on what we submitted as Makana. I don’t want people claiming victories that are not theirs.” Makana insiders have expressed concern that “strong” political interference could scupper Pillay’s efforts at turning around the municipality, pointing to control over funding as the key. “The mantra is things went wrong because we had no permanent municipal manager – but if a new MM walked in tomorrow, they would not be The Messiah. They would still require political support,” said one Council insider, who has extensive political and administrative experience. THE INSIDE STORY: “The reason the Council agreed to bring him here was for him to assist them to get money for the Council. That’s why they agreed to a three-month extension of his term.” – Read more at bit.ly/GrocCouncil