Makhanda (Grahamstown) has two loadshedding areas – 1 and 2. Loadshedding times for each area today, according to Eskom’s schedule are as follows: Grahamstown 1
7am-9.30am Rhodes, Military Base, Golf Course, Slaaikraal, Strowan Farm, Strowan Mine, Industrial Area, Prison, Tick Research, Mountain Drive, Brackendale farm, Salem Crossroads, Thomas Baines, Howieson’s Poort & Settlers Pump Station, Cradock Heights, Somerset Heights, Ghost Town, Hooggenoeg, Vergenoeg, Scott’s Farm, Kingswood, Hill 60, West Hill, Orsmond Area, Upper High, New and African streets. Grahamstown 2
11pm to 1.30am Stones Hill, Belmont Area, Sunnyside, Fort England Area, CBD Area, Oatlands North, Oatlands South, Settlers Hospital, St Andrew’s College, Fort England Hospital, VG High and Primary School, PJ Olivier School, Bottom of High, New and African streets.  STATEMENT FROM ESKOM: POWER ALERT 1 Date: 06 December 2018 Eskom to implement Stage 2 rotational loadshedding at 09:00 Thursday, 06 December 2018: As a result of a shortage of capacity due to a number of generating units still out of service due to breakdowns, Eskom will be implementing Stage 2 rotational loadshedding from 09:00 and this is likely to continue until 22:00. Our maintenance teams continue to work hard to bring the units back to service. Customers are reminded to treat all electrical points as live during loadshedding.  Eskom would like to sincerely apologise for the inconvenience caused. Stage 2 calls for 2000MW to be rotationally loadshed nationally at a given period. Loadshedding is conducted rotationally as a measure of last resort to protect the power system from a total collapse or blackout. We continue to appeal to residents and businesses to use electricity sparingly during this period. Please switch off geysers as well as all non-essential lighting and electricity appliances to assist in reducing demand. For Eskom customers, these schedules are available on the Eskom website (http://loadshedding.eskom.co.za).Eskom customers can also contact our customer contact centre at 0860 037 566.  UNDERSTANDING THE LOAD-SHEDDING SCHEDULE (from Eskom’s website) Understanding Eskom Load Shedding Stages Load shedding will be used under emergency conditions for limited periods. Four schedules have been developed based on the possibility of risk and to ensure that load shedding is applied in a fair and equitable manner: Load shedding will be implemented in most instances in 2 hour blocks. Each of the time periods has an additional 30 minutes added to allow for switching of networks in a way that will not damage the power system. Eskom will begin load shedding customers at the start of the period (for example from 06:00), and will have all scheduled customers switched off within the first half hour (that is, by 06:30) At the end of the period, after the two / four hours (that is, by 08:00 or 10:00 as applicable), Eskom will start returning power to customers and should have them all back within half an hour (that is, by 08:30 or 10:30). The frequency of load shedding increases as higher Stages are used If more load needs to be shed than has been scheduled in Stages 1, 2, 3 and 4 then National Control will instruct additional, unscheduled load shedding. This means you may be shed outside of your scheduled times. The actual stage in use at the time will be displayed on the main Eskom website and on the home page of the Load Shedding Website, as well as on the MyEskom App.