There will be no stop-and-go sections on the R72, section 3, between Port Alfred and Great Fish River in the Eastern Cape, from 13 December until 9 January next year, SANRAL has announced. The project, which was started in March 2015 is expected to finish in May next year and comprise the major rehabilitation of the R72 Section 3 and is located between Port Alfred at km -1.30 and the Great Fish River at km 27.50. “This upgrade includes the construction of two 3.7-metre driving lanes, with auxiliary (climbing) lanes, and a surfaced shoulder on both sides of the new road. The new geometric design of the road has made the upgraded road safer for motorists,” said Mbulelo Peterson, SANRAL Southern Region Manager. The completed work in the urban area of Port Alfred consist mostly of a new bitumen treated base resurfacing. An asphalt wearing course layer will complete the resurfacing. The placing of the asphalt wearing course layer will start soon but will only be completed next year. Traffic lines and markings will be painted after completion of the asphalt re-surfacing. A small portion of climbing lane is outstanding from the Port Alfred Marina to the Port Alfred High School, but this should be complete before the contractor closes for the December holiday. “Work is in progress at the new Port Alfred High School entrance. The construction of the Park Avenue intersection was delayed due to an unknown waterpipe that was damaged and will resume in the New Year.” Sidewalks, kerb storm water inlets and kerbs should be completed from Van Riebeeck Street to Main Street and sidewalks and kerbs in the section in front of the Marina should also be complete before the contractor shuts down from 13 December 2018 to 09 January 2019. Any incomplete work in the urban and rural section will be made safe and maintained by an emergency team consisting of a Traffic Safety Officer accompanied by a skeleton team and in addition a small team selected by the contractor. “Work on the rural section is in progress and the right-hand carriage way is in an advanced stage of completion. Ancillary work like concrete side drains and other works are in progress. “The completion of all work, will be dependent on weather conditions,” Peterson said. “Residents of Port Alfred and motorists travelling on the R72 between Port Alfred and the Fish River, during the December holiday period, are requested to please be aware of road signs, speed restrictions and other safety measures in place during this period.”