The gazetting of a decision to change Grahamstown’s name could be a matter of months away. This follows confirmation that the South African Geographical Names  Council intends to recommend to the Minister of Arts and Culture that the city’s name be changed, on historical grounds. The move comes after a heated meeting on Thursday 15 February at the Albany Museum, where objectors to a proposed name change had been invited to have their say. Among those hearing arguments were members of the SAGNC from across the country. The Council is made up of 15-25 members and Council Chairperson Johnny Mohlala said about 12 were present at the Albany Museum meeting. Mohlala, who also interacts with Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa as a member of the Ministerial Task Team for Transformation of the Heritage Landscape, said he didn’t know how long the process would take. “It could be three months, six months – I don’t know how long it will take him to apply his mind,” Mohlala said in a lengthy interview with Grocott’s Mail after the State of the Nation address last weekend. But in addition to the Council’s formal recommendation to change Grahamstown’s name on historical grounds, he would also be speaking to Mthethwa in his personal capacity. “I will bug him for a decision,” Mohlala said. Some objectors presented considered arguments that included, variously: * The importance of the town’s name and identity for tourism; * That the process was unfortunate in that it missed the chance to bring members of the community with opposing view together in a way that would allow them to hear each other’s concerns; * That the view of Colonel John Graham’s reputation as a murderous tyrant was inaccurate in the context of the fact that he was a soldier doing his job; * That the administrative cost of changing signage, maps and business stationery should rather be spent on fixing infrastructure and service delivery in Makana; * That the process was wrong on procedural and legal grounds; Several objectors were visibly and audibly angry and berated the process and the officials conducting it. Mohlala told Grocott’s Mail the recommendation was on historical grounds. “Graham was seen as a hero by his people at that time – but he has no hero status among local people,” Mohlala said. “In Grahamstown you will see hardly any African history portrayed.” The Keep Grahamstown Grahamstown (KGG) campaign said they had received no official confirmation that the SAGNC’s decision was to move ahead on the name change. “We have in the meantime written directly to the Minister of Arts & Culture in that connection providing reasons why the SAGNC’s recommendation should not be accepted,” wrote the campaign’s chair, Jock McConnachie in response to questions from Grocott’s Mail. McConnachie has challenged the legality of the process on the grounds of improper public consultation, arguing that the current move was a continuation of a process started in 2007. McConnachie said he had records proving that a name change was not the preference of the majority in a series of meetings during that period. Mohlala, however, was adamant they had followed the process to the letter, having learnt the lesson from the failed name change attempt in Louis Trichardt. He said the recommendation was launched by an application by cultural activist Xola Mali in December 2014. WHAT IS THE SA GEORGAPHICAL NAMES COUNCIL? The SA Geographical Names Council gazetted 2 December 1998:
http://www.dac.gov.za/sites/default/files/Legislations%20Files/a118-98.pdf