By Makana Municipality Three weeks into his new job, the new Director of Public Safety and Community Services, Kelello Makgoka had a Q&A with the Communications team . On origins Kelello Makgoka, I was born in Kimberley, Northern Cape. On education profile I hold B-Tech Degree in Environmental Health and Specialised in Waste management, Water Quality management and Management Practice as major subjects; On his previous job profile I started my career in 2002 in the Eastern Cape Province, Cacadu District currently known as Sarah Baartman District. I worked as Environmental Health Practitioner for Kouga Municipality and later [was]appointed as Acting Manager Cleansing, Waste and Parks for Kouga Municipality. In 2006 I was appointed by Sundays River Valley Municipality as Manager and I was responsible for Environmental health, Waste Management Department.In 2009 was appointed as Acting Director Community services, for a period of 4 years and 8 months and my key responsibility included overall management of: During this period I have participated in the development of various departmental policies, by laws and management plans. In 2014 I was appointed by Sarah Baartman District Municipality as Senior Manager Environmental Health Services, and I was responsible for management of the entire District Environmental Health and Environmental Management. During this period I have developed District Quality Management Plan (AQMP), reviewed Integrated Waste Management Plans (IWMP) of local Municipalities under SBDM and Develop a Draft Climate Change Responses Plan. 2017 I was again appointed as Acting Director Infrastructure, planning and community services for a period of 9 months, key responsibilities overall Infrastructure of: On his priorities based on observations of Makana I joined Makana Municipality on the 2 July 2018. My main priorities are to ensure:  The main challenges facing the directorate are insufficient budget to cover departmental operations such as tools of trade, equipment’s etc; mechanical breakdown, repairs of fleet [vehicles; and] shortage of staff in key sections. On first impressions of Grahamstown as a city and its people The City has a great potential to be the best town and [it]has great people.  